From: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~hcwong/Pdfs/icip02.ps

H. Chi Wong, Marshall Bern, and David Goldberg

Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Rd., Palo Alto, CA 94304

ABSTRACT

We describe algorithm for cumputing an image signature,
suitable for first-stage screening for duplicate images. Our
signature relies on relative brightness of image regions, and
is generally applicable to photographs, text documents, and
line art. We give experimental results on the sensitivity and
robustness of signatures for actual image collections, and also
results on the robustness of signature under transformations
such as resizing, rescanning, and compression.

1. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

Massive image databases are becoming increasingly common.
Examples include document image databases such as
declassified government documents [8], and photo archives
such as the New York Times archive. Duplicate removal offers
space and bandwidth savings, and more user-friendly
search results. Despite some effort to cull duplicates, the image
search service of Google [4] often retrieves a number
of duplicate and near-duplicate images. Duplicate detection
also finds application in copyright protection and authentication.

We believe that duplicate detection is most effectively
solved in two distinct stages. A fast first stage reduces images
to small signatures, with the property that signatures
of two different versions of the same image hve small vector
distance relative to the typical distance between signatures
of distinct images. A slow second stage then makes
a detailed comparison of candidate duplicates identified in
the first stage. Detailed comparison of document images can
identify changes as small as moving a decimal point [16].

In this paper we give a fast and simple algorithm for the
first stage. Our image signature encodes the relative brightness
of different regions of the image; it can be applied quite
generally to text documents images, linear art (such as cartoons),
and continuous-tone images. Although there are a number
of image signatures that applies to such a wide class of images.
The main limitation of our signature is that it is not designed
to handle large amounts of cropping or rotation. This
design chice is appropiate for document image databases
and Web search, but not for object recognition or for detecting
copyright violations.

2. PREVIOUS WORK

Image signatures have already been used to address three different,
but closely related, problems: similarity search, authentication,
and duplicate detection. The three problems have
slightly different characteristics that affect the design of the
signature. Signatures for similarity search [10] (for example,
color histograms) must preserve similaritm not just identity,
and hence do not necessarily spread out non-duplicates
very effectively. Signatures for authentication [1, 11, 13, 15]
must be more sensitive -- but can be much slower -- than signatures
for the first stage of duplicate detection.

Nevertheless, the techniques developed for search and
authentication can be harnessed for duplicate detection. Our
work adapts a method by O'Gorman and Rabinovich [11]
for computing a signature for ID card photo and computes
a vector of 8 bits for each point in the grid; roughly
speaking, each bit records hether a neighborhood of that
point is darker or lighter than a neighborhood of its 8 diagonal
or orthogonal neighbors. In the usage scenario, the image
signature computed from the photo is compared with a
reference signature written on the ID card and digitally signed
with public-key cryptography.

Another technique worth considering lets the image content
dictate the neighborhoods used in the signature [1, 14].
Schmid and Mohr [14] use a corner-point detector to define
"interesting points" in the image. The signature then includes
a statistical abstract of the neighborhood of each interesting
point. compared to grid-based methods such as ours, this
approach has the advantage that it can handle large amounts
of cropping, and if the statistics at each interesting point are
rotation invariante, it can also handle arbitrary amounts of rotation.
On the other hand, it seems to take several hundred
interesting points to obtain a reliable signature, and this approach
is likely to break down entirely for text documents or
line art images, which may contain thousand of interesting
points with very similar statistics.

Also available in the literature are specialized isgnature